---
{"tags":["LinearAlgebra","teaching","mathematics"],"dg-publish":true,"dg-path":"II. Teaching/Mathematics/Bases and Dimension.md","permalink":"/ii-teaching/mathematics/bases-and-dimension/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"noteIcon":"1","created":"2026-02-11T19:13:57.384-10:00","updated":"2026-02-11T19:13:57.384-10:00"}
---



Subjects: [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Linear Algebra\|Linear Algebra]]

Links: [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Linear Independence\|Linear Independence]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Linear Combinations\|Linear Combinations]]
## Definition Basis
A basis $\beta$ for a vector space $V$ is a linearly independent subset of $V$ that generates V. If $\beta$ is a basis for V, we also say that the vectors of $\beta$ form a basis for V.

## Theorems Basis
_**Theorem:**_ Let $\beta = \{u_1 , u_2 , \dots , u_n\}$ is a basis for $V$ if and only if each $v\in V$ can be uniquely expressed as a linear combination of vectors of $\beta$, that is, can be expressed in the form:

$$ v = \sum_{i= 1}^na_iu_i $$

for unique scalars $a_1, a_2, \dots a_n$.

_**Theorem:**_ Let a vector space $V$ is generated by a finite set $S$, then some subset of $S$ is a basis for $V$. Hence $V$ base a finite basis.

**Replacement Theorem:** Let $V$ be a vector space that is generated by a set $G$ containing exactly $n$ vectors. and let $L$ be a linearly independent subset of $V$ containing exactly $m$ vectors. Then $m \leq n$ and there exists a subset $H$ of $G$ containing exactly $n - m$ vectors such that $L \cup H$ generates $V.$

_**Corollary:**_ Let $V$ be a vector space having a finite basis. Then all bases for $V$ are finite, and every basis for $V$ contains the same number of vectors.

_**Definition:**_ A vector space is called _**finite-dimensional**_ if it has a basis consisting of a finite number of vectors. The unique integer $n$ such that every basis for $V$ contains exactly $n$ elements is called the _**dimension**_ of $V$ and is denoted by $\text{dim}(V)$. A vector space that is not finite-dimensional is called _**infinite-dimensional**_.

## Theorems Dimension

_**Corollary:**_ Let V be a vector space with dimension n:

1. Any finite generating set for $V$ contains at least $n$ vectors, and a generating set for $V$ that contains exactly $n$ vectors is a basis for $V$.
2. Any linearly independent subset of $V$ that contains exactly $n$ vectors is a basis for $V.$
3. Every linearly independent subset of $V$ can be extended to a basis for $V$, that is, if $L$ is a linearly independent subset of $V$, then there is a basis $\beta$ of $V$ such that $L \sube \beta.$

_**Theorem:**_ Let $W$ be a subspace of a finite-dimensional vector space$V$. Then $W$ is finite-dimensional and $\text{dim}(W)\leq \text{dim}(V)$. Moreover, if $\text{dim}(W) = \text{dim}(V)$, then $V = W$.

_**Corollary:**_ If $W$ is a subspace of a finite-dimensional vector space $V$, then any basis for $W$ can be extended to a basis for $V.$

Let $\{U_i\}_{i=0}^n$ be a collection of subspaces of $V$ a finite dimensional vector space, such that $\sum U_i$ is a direct sum $\left(\bigoplus U_i\right)$, iff:

$$ \dim\left(\bigoplus_{i=0}^n U_i \right) = \sum_{i=0}^n\dim(U_i) $$