---
{"tags":["Topology/AlgebraicTopology"],"dg-publish":true,"dg-path":"II. Teaching/Mathematics/Fundamental Group of the Circle.md","permalink":"/ii-teaching/mathematics/fundamental-group-of-the-circle/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"noteIcon":"1","created":"2026-02-08T18:42:15.000-10:00","updated":"2026-02-09T11:03:46.484-10:00"}
---


Subjects: [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Algebraic Topology\|Algebraic Topology]]
Links: [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Fundamental Group of a Topological Space\|Fundamental Group of a Topological Space]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Homotopy Equivalence\|Homotopy Equivalence]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Homotopy in C\|Homotopy in C]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Covering Maps\|Covering Maps]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Topological Manifolds\|Topological Manifolds]]

For the rest of the note we will analyse $\pi_1(\Bbb S^1, 1)$ on a close examination of the expoontial quotient map $\varepsilon: \Bbb R \to \Bbb S^1 \subseteq \Bbb C$ defined $\varepsilon(r):= \exp(2\pi ir)$. 
# Lifting Properties of the Circle

**Def:** If $B$ is a topological space and $\varphi: B \to \Bbb S^1$ is a continuous map a *lift of $\varphi$* is a continuous map $\tilde \varphi: B \to\Bbb R$ such that the diagram commutes 
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts, amsmath, amssymb}

\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[row sep=2cm, column sep=2cm]
     & \mathbb{R}\arrow[d,"\varepsilon"] \\
     B\arrow[r,"\varphi"']\arrow[ur,dashed,"\tilde\varphi"] & \mathbb{S}^1
   \end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
**Prop:** Each point $z\in \Bbb S^1$ has a neighbourhood $U$ such that $\varepsilon^{-1}[U]$ is a countable union of disjoint intervals $\tilde U_n$ with the property that $\varepsilon|_{\tilde U_n}: \tilde U_n \to U$ is a homeomorphism. 

**Local Section Property of the Circle:** Let $U\subseteq \Bbb S^1$ be any evenly covered open subset. For any $z\in U$ and any $r$ in the fiber of $\varepsilon$ over $z$, there is a local section $\sigma$ of $\varepsilon$ over U$ sich that $\sigma(z) = r$. 

**Unique Lifting Property of the Circle:** Let $B$ be a connected topological space. Suppose $\varphi: B \to \Bbb S^1$ is continuos and $\tilde \varphi_1, \varphi_2: B \to \Bbb R$ are lifts of $\varphi$ that agree at some point of $B$. Then $\tilde \varphi_1$ is equal to $\tilde \varphi_2$. 

**Path Lifting Property of the Circle** Suppose $f: I \to \Bbb S^1$ is any path, and $r_0\in \Bbb R$ is any point in the fiber of $\varepsilon$ over $f(0)$. Then there exists a unique lift $\tilde f: I \to \Bbb R$ of $f$ such that $\tilde f(0) = r_0$, and any other lifft differs from $\tilde f$ by an addition of an integer constant.

**Homotopy Lifting Property of the Circle:** Let $B$ be a locally connected topological space. Suppose that $\varphi_0, \varphi_1: B \to \Bbb S^1$ are continuous maps, $H:B \times I \to \Bbb S^1$ is a homotopy from $\varphi_0$ to $\varphi_1$, and $\varphi_0: B \to \Bbb R$ is any lift of $\varphi_0$. Then there exists a unique lift $H$ to a homotopy $\tilde H$ satisfying $\tilde H_0 = \tilde \varphi_0$. If $H$ is stationary on some subset $A\subseteq B$, then so is $\tilde H$. 

**Path Homotopy Criterion for the Circle:** Suppose $f_0$ and $f_1$ are paths in $\Bbb S^1$ with the same initial point and the same terminal point, and $\tilde f_0, \tilde f_1: I \to \Bbb R$ are lifts of $f_0$ and $f_1$ with the same initial point. The $f_0 \sim f_1$ iff $\tilde f_0$ and \tilde $f_1$ have the same terminal point.

# Fundamental Group

**Def:** Suppose $f: I \to \Bbb S^1$ is a loop based at a point $z_0\in \Bbb S^1$. If $\tilde f: I \to \Bbb R$ is any lift of $f$ then we define the *winding number of $f$* to be $N(f) := \tilde f(1)- \tilde f(0)$. Note that it is well defined, by the Path Lifting property of the circle.

**Prop:** A rotation of $\Bbb S^1$ is a map $\rho: \Bbb S^1\to\Bbb S^1$ of the form $\rho(z) e^{i\theta}z$ for some fixed $e^{i\theta}\in \Bbb S^1$. Then $N(\rho \circ f) = N(f)$ for every loop $f\in\Bbb S^1$ and every rotation $\rho$.

**Homotopy Classification of Loops in $\Bbb S^1$** Two loops in $\Bbb S^1$ based at the same point are path-homotopy iff they have the same winding number. 

Let $\omega: I \to\Bbb S^1$ be the loop $\omega(s) = e^{2\pi i s}$ based at $1$, which traverses the circle once counterclockwise at constant speed. 

**Fundamental Group of the Circle:** The group $\pi_1(\Bbb S^1, 1)$ is an infinite cyclic group generated by $[\omega]$, and thus $\pi_1(\Bbb S^1, 1) \cong \Bbb Z$. 

**Fundamental Group of the Punctured Plane:** The fundamental group $\pi_1(\Bbb C\setminus \{0\}, 1)$ is an infinite cyclic group generated by the path class of the loop $\omega$.

**Def:** If $f: I \to \Bbb C\setminus\{0\}$ is any loop, we define the *winding number of $f$* to be the winding number of the loop $r\circ f$ where $r:\Bbb C\setminus \{0\} \to \Bbb S^1$ is the retraction $r(z) = z/|z|$. 

**Classification of Loops in the Punctured Plane:** Two loops in $\Bbb C\setminus\{0\}$ based at the same point are path-homotopic iff they have the same winding number. 

**Fundamental Groups of Tori:** Let $\Bbb T^n := \Bbb S^1 \times \dots \times \Bbb S^1$ be the $n$-dimensional torus with $p = (1, \dots, 1)$ as a base point, and for each $j = 1, \dots, n$ let $\omega_j$ denoted the standard loop in the $j$th copy of $\Bbb S^1$: $$\omega_j (s) = (1,\dots, 1,e^{2\pi i s},1\dots, 1).$$The map $\varphi: \Bbb Z^n \to \pi_1(\Bbb T^n,p)$ given by $\varphi(k_1, \dots, k_n) = [\omega]^{k_1}\cdots[\omega_n]^{k_n}$$ is an isomorphism, and $\pi_1(\Bbb T^n, p) \cong \Bbb Z^n$. 

**Cor:** For $n \ge 2$, the $n$-sphere is not homeomorphic to the $n$-torus. 

# Degree Theory for the Circle

**Def:** If $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ is a continuous map, we define the *degree of $\varphi$* to be the winding number of the loop $\varphi \circ \omega$. This integer is denoted by $\deg \varphi$. 

For any continuous map $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$, let $\rho_\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ be the rotation that takes $\varphi(1) \mapsto 1$, namely $\rho_\varphi(z) = z/\varphi(1)$. 

**Prop:** Suppose $f: I \to \Bbb C\setminus\{0\}$ is continuously differentiable loop. Then the winding number is given by $$N(f)= \frac1{2\pi i} \int_0^1 \frac{f'(s)}{f(s)}\, ds.$$
**Def:** A *vector field* on $\Bbb R^n$ is a continuous map $V: \Bbb R^n \to\Bbb R^n$. If $V$ is a vector field, a point $p\in \Bbb R^n$ is called a *singular point of $V$* if $V(p) = 0$, and a *regular point* if $V(p) \neq 0$. A singular point is *isolated* if it has neighbourhood no other singular points. Suppose $V$ is a vector field on $\Bbb R^n$, and let $\mathcal R_V \subseteq \Bbb R^2$ denote the set of regular points of $V$. For any loop $f:I \to \mathcal R_V$, define the *winding number of $V$ around $f$*, denoted by $N(V, f)$, to be the winding number of the loop $V \circ f: I \to \Bbb R\setminus \{0\}$.
- $N(V, f)$ depends only on the path class of $f$. 
- Suppose $p$ is an isolated singular point of $V$. Then $N(V, f)$ is independent of $\varepsilon$ for $\varepsilon$ sufficiently small, where $f_\varepsilon(s) = p+ \varepsilon\omega(s)$, and $\omega$ is the standard counterclockwise loop around the unit circle. This integer is called the *index of $V$ at $p$*, and is denoted by $\text{Ind}(V, p)$.
- If $V$ has finitely many singular points in the closed unit disk, all in the interior, then $N(V, \omega)$ is equal to the sum of indices of $V$ at the interior singular points.


**Lemma:** If $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ is continuous, the degree of $\varphi$ is equal to the [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Group Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms#^2b7d8f\|degree of the endomorphism]] $(\rho_\varphi\circ \varphi)_*$. In particular, if $\varphi(1)$, then $\deg \varphi = \deg \varphi_*$. 

**Properties of Degree:**
- Homotopic continuous maps have the same degree.
- If $\varphi, \psi: \Bbb S^1\to \Bbb S^1$ are continuous maps, then $\deg(\psi \circ \varphi) = (\deg \psi) (\deg \varphi)$.

**Degrees of Maps:**
- The identity map of the circle has degree $1$
- Every constant map has degree $0$.
- Every rotation has degree $1$.
- For each $n \in \Bbb Z$, let $p_n: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ be the *$n$th power map*, defined in complex notation $p_n(z) := z^n$, we see that $p_n$ has degree $n$. 
- The *conjugation map* $c: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$, given by $c(z) = \bar z$. We see that $c = p_{-1}$, and thus have degree $-1$
- The *antipodal map* is the map $\alpha: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ is given by $\alpha(z) := -z$, is a rotation, and thus have degree $1$.

**Homotopy Classification of Maps of the Circle:** Two continuous maps from $\Bbb S^1$ to itself are homotopic iff they have the same degree.

**Th:** Let $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$. If $\deg \varphi \neq 0$, then $\varphi$ is surjective.

**Th:** Let $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ be continuous. If $\deg \varphi \neq  1$, then $\varphi$ has a fixed point.

**Th:** Let $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ be continuous. If $\deg \varphi \neq \pm 1$, then $\varphi$ is not injective. 

**Prop:** Let $\varphi, \psi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ be continuous. If $\deg\varphi \neq \deg\psi$, then there's a $z\in \Bbb S^1$ such that $\varphi(z) =-\psi(z)$. 

**[[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Topological Manifolds#^ca2c82\|Invariance of Dimension]], $2$-dimensional Case:** A non empty topological space cannot be a $2$-manifold and an $n$-manifold for some $n > 2$. 

**[[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Topological Manifolds#^cd5f36\|Invariance of the Boundary]], $2$-dimensional Case:** Suppose $M$ is a $2$-dimensional manifold with boundary. A point of $M$ cannot be both a boundary point and interior point. 

**Prop:** A continuous map $\varphi: \Bbb S^1 \to \Bbb S^1$ has an extension to a continuous map $\Phi: \bar{\Bbb B}^2 \to \Bbb S^1$ iff it has degree $0$.

**The Brouwer Fixed Point Theorem, $2$-dimensional Case:** Every continuous map $f: \bar{\Bbb B}^2\to \bar{\Bbb B}^2$ has a fixed point. 

**Homotopy Classification of Torus Maps:** For each continuous map $\varphi: \Bbb T^2 \to \Bbb T^2$, there is a $2\times 2$ integer matrix $D(\varphi)$, with the following properties:
- Two continuous maps $\varphi$ and $\psi$ are homotopic off $D(\varphi) = D(\psi)$.
- $D(\psi \circ \varphi)$ is equal to the matrix product $D(\psi) D(\varphi)$
- For every $2\times 2$ integer matrix $E$, there is a continuous map $\varphi: \Bbb T^2\to \Bbb T^2$ such that $D(\varphi) = E$.
- If $\varphi$ is homotopic to a homeomorphism iff $D(\varphi)$ is invertible over the integers.

# Even and Odd Functions

**Def:** Let $f:\Bbb S^1 \to\Bbb S^1$ be a continuous functions. We say $f$ is odd if $f(-z) = f(z)$ for all $z\in \Bbb S^1$, and *even* if $f(z) = f(-z)$.

**Prop:** Every odd map has an odd degree. This result relies on a more general covering maps theory.

**Prop:** Every even map has an even degree, 