---
{"tags":["GroupTheory","teaching","mathematics"],"dg-publish":true,"dg-path":"II. Teaching/Mathematics/Commutator Subgroup","permalink":"/ii-teaching/mathematics/commutator-subgroup/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"noteIcon":"1","created":"2026-02-11T19:13:57.389-10:00","updated":"2026-02-11T20:25:21.238-10:00"}
---



Subjects: [Group Theory](Group%20Theory)
Links: [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Normal Subgroups and Quotient Groups\|Normal Subgroups and Quotient Groups]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Subgroups\|Subgroups]], [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Cauchy and Sylow Theorems\|Cauchy and Sylow Theorems]]

**Def:** Let $G$ be a group, and $a, b \in G$, then the commutator of $a$ and $b$ is $[a, b] := a^{-1}b^{-1}ab\in G$. The commutator is the element $e$ iff $ab = ba$, that is $a$ and $b$ commute. In general, $ab = ba[a, b]$, like how close are those elements to commute. An element of $G$ of the form $[a, b]$ is called a commutator. 

The *commutator subgroup* $[G, G]$ or the *derived subgroup* denoted as $G'$ or $G^{(1)}$: it is the subgroup generated by all the commutators. By definition, any element of $[G, G]$ is of the form $$[a_1, b_1] \cdots [a_n, b_n]$$for some $n \in \Bbb N$, and where $a_i, b_i \in G$. Doing some elementary algebra we get that $[G, G] \trianglelefteq G$.

**Prop:** Let $G$ be a group and $H \trianglelefteq G$. $G/H$ is abelian iff $[G, G] \le H$.

In particular $G/[G, G]$ is abelian and it is called the abelianisation of $G$, usually denoted as $G^{\text{ab}}$ or $G_{\text{ab}}$.  

A group $G$ is called *perfect* if $G = [G, G]$. This like the opposite of being abelian. 

**Characteristic Property of the Abelianisation:** Let $G$ be a group. For any abelian group $H$ and any homomorphism $\varphi: G \to H$, there exists a unique homomorphism $g: G^\text{ab}\to H$ such that the following diagram commutes:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts, amsmath, amssymb}
\begin{document} 
\begin{tikzcd}[row sep=2cm, column sep=2cm]
G \arrow[d, two heads,"\varphi"'] \arrow[r, "f"] & H \\
{G^\text{ab}}\arrow[ur, dashed, "g"']
\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

**Cor:** Given a group $G$, then $G^\text{ab}$ is the unique group (up to isomorphism) that satisfies the characteristic property.

**Cor:** We see that the abelianisation defines a covariant functor from $\sf Grp$ to $\sf Ab$. This is because if $f:G \to H$ is a group homomorphism, then there exists a unique homomorphism $f^\text{ab}:G^\text{ab} \to H^\text{ab}$ such that the following diagram commmute:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts, amsmath, amssymb}
\begin{document} 
\begin{tikzcd}[row sep=2cm, column sep=2cm]
G \arrow[d, two heads,"\pi"'] \arrow[r, "f"]\arrow[dr, "\pi \circ f"] & H \arrow[d, two heads,"\pi"] \\
{G^\text{ab}}\arrow[r, dashed, "f^\text{ab}"'] & H^\text{ab}
\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
Thus, $(-)^\text{ab}: \sf Grp \to Ab$ is a [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Categories and Functors\|covariant functor]], where $G \mapsto G^\text{ab}$, and $(f: G \to H) \mapsto f^\text{ab}: G^\text{ab} \to H^\text{ab}$. 

**Prop:** Let $\{G_\alpha \mid \alpha<\kappa\}$ be a collection of groups. Then $$\left(\coprod_{\alpha<\kappa} G_\alpha\right)^\text{ab} \cong \bigoplus_{\alpha <\kappa} G_\alpha^\text{ab}.$$This means that $(-)^\text{ab}$ sends the [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Free Product of Groups\|coproduct]] of $\sf Grp$ to the coproduct of the images in $\sf Ab$. 

**Cor:** Let $S$ be a nonempty set, then $F(S)^\text{ab} \cong \Bbb Z\langle S\rangle$, where $F(S)$ is the [free group](Free%20Groups) generated by $S$, and $\Bbb \langle S \rangle$ is the[[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Free Abelian Groups\| free abelian group]] generated by $S$, or the free $\Bbb Z$-module generated by $S$. 

 **Prop:** Let $\{G_\alpha \mid \alpha<\kappa\}$ be a collection of groups. Then $$\left(\prod_{\alpha<\kappa} G_\alpha\right)^\text{ab} \cong \prod_{\alpha <\kappa} G_\alpha^\text{ab}.$$This means that $(-)^\text{ab}$ sends the product of $\sf Grp$ to the product of the images in $\sf Ab$. 

**Def:** Let $G$ be a group. We define the following groups inductively $G^{(0)} := G$, and $$G^{(n+1)} := [G^{(n)}, G^{(n)}]$$for $n \ge 1$. The groups $G^{(2)}$, $G^{(3)}, \dots$ are called the *second derived subgroup, third derived subgroup* and so forth. 

We get the following properties for the derived subgroups:
- $G^{(n+1)} \trianglelefteq G^{(n)}$ for every $n \ge 0$. 
- $G^{(n+1)} \trianglelefteq G$ for every $n \ge 0$. 
- The quotients $G^{(n)} / G^{(n+1)}$ is abelian for every $n \ge 0$.

**Prop:** A group $G$ is solvable iff $G^{(n)} =  1$ for some $n \ge 0$. 

**Th:** Let $G$ be a group. Then,
- If $H \le G$ is a subgroup and $G$ is solvable, then $H$ is solvable. 
- If $H \trianglelefteq G$ and $G$ is solvable, then $G/H$ is solvable.
- If $H \trianglelefteq G$ is such that $H$ and $G/H$ are solvable, then $G$ is solvable. 

This means that the class $\sf Sol$ of solvable groups is closed under subgroups, quotients and [extensions](Group%20Extensions). 

We can extend the definition of the commutator subgroup. If $H$ and $K$ are two subgroups of $G$, we denote $[H, K]$ to be the subgroup of $G$ generated by the commutators of the form $$[h, k] = hkh^{-1}k^{-1} \qquad h\in H, k\in K.$$We know that $[H, K] = [K, H]$. 

**Lemma:**
- Let $H$ and $K$ subgroups of $G$. Then $[H, K] \subseteq H$ iff $K \le N_G(H)$. 
- If $K \trianglelefteq G$ and $K \le H \le G$, then $[H, G] \le K$ iff $H/K \le Z(G/K)$. 

**Def:** We define inductively a sequence of subgroups of $G$. $$L_1(G) := G, \qquad L_{n+1}(G) := [L_n(G), G]$$for $n \ge 2$. Just note that $L_2(G) = G^{(1)}$. 

**Prop:** Let $G$ be a group. For any integer $n \ge 1$ the following are true:
- $L_{n+1}(G) \le L_n(G)$
- $L_n(G)$ is a normal subgroup of $G$. 

This last proposition tells that the sequence of groups of $G$: $$G = : L_1(G) \supseteq L_2(G) \supseteq \dots \supseteq L_k(G) \supseteq \dots \supseteq \{1\} = 1$$is called the *central inferior sequence of* $G$. 

**Th:** Let $G$ be a group. $Z^m(G) = G$ iff $L_{m+1}(G)$. It follows that $G$ is [[charleshoots.net/II. Teaching/Mathematics/Nilpotent Groups\|nilpotent]] of class $m$ iff $L_{m+1}(G) = 1$, and $m$ is the least integer that satisfies this. 